FocusInvestor.com: The Focused Few Presents:  
 
The Focus Investing Series Part 3: The Munger Network of Mental Models  
 
 
Written by: 
Richard M. Rockwood

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FocusInvestor.com 
 
Focus Investing Series Part 3: Mental Models 
Introduction 
“You’ve got to have models in your head and you’ve got to array your experience – both vicarious and direct – onto this latticework of 
mental models.” Charlie Munger  
Mr. Charles T. Munger, Vice Chairman of Berkshire Hathaway, is Warren Buffett’s partner at 
Berkshire Hathaway. He is famous for his cutting and insightful commentary on issues that 
concern him and he is a preeminent investor. He is a voracious reader and devotee of great 
thinkers such as Ben Franklin, whose wisdom he partially credits with developing his thought 
processes. Mr. Buffett has frequently given credit to Mr. Munger for providing him with key 
insights into the investment process.  
Mr. Munger does not pretend that investing is easy. He advises that it takes sharp wits, strategy, 
and a lot of discipline to be successful in the investment field. Mr. Munger contends that more 
individuals could achieve better investment results than they actually do, if only they'd employ 
some of the basic "mental methods" he and Mr. Buffett have used throughout their careers.  
"The number one idea," he said in a 2001 Harvard Law Bulletin interview1, "is to view a stock as 
an ownership of the business [and] to judge the staying quality of the business in terms of its 
competitive advantage. Look for more value in terms of discounted future cash flow than you're 
paying for. Move only when you have an advantage. It's very basic. You have to understand the 
odds and have the discipline to bet only when the odds are in your favor."  
Mr. Buffett is clearly a master of betting only when the odds are in his favor. This excerpt from 
the Berkshire Hathaway 1980 annual report shows how he uses this concept to his advantage:  
“GEICO’s problems at that time [1976] put it in a position analogous to that of American Express 
in 1964 following the salad oil scandal. Both were one-of-a-kind companies, temporarily reeling 
from the effects of fiscal blow that did not destroy their exceptional underlying economics.  The 
GEICO and American Express situations, extraordinary business franchises with a localized 
excisable cancer (needing, to be sure, a skilled surgeon), should be distinguished from the true 
“turnaround” situation in which the managers expect – and need – to pull off a corporate 
Pygmalion.”  
This article will attempt to list a series of models that cover areas of knowledge that individuals 
have almost certainly amassed during their lifetimes. This article will also discuss how most 
individuals understand these concepts only as they relate to the task they are currently performing 
or pondering. For example, most engineers would never consider adapting their knowledge of 
breakpoint to the investing process.  
It is my hope that, after reading this article in the focus investing series, the reader will 
understand how to develop and use his or her own system of mental models. I believe that 
developing the habit of examining problems using this multidisciplinary approach should not only 
help you become a better investor but, much more importantly, a better thinker.  
                                                 
1  http://www.law.harvard.edu/alumni/bulletin/2001/summer/feature_1-fulltext.html 
Page 2 of 22

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FocusInvestor.com 
 
Focus Investing Series Part 3: Mental Models 
 
A Network of Mental Models  
The idea of developing a network of mental models is based on the concept that everyone should 
approach problem-solving from many difference perspectives.  The traditional teaching method 
used in the typical American classroom revolves around the idea that topics should be learned in 
isolation from other topics. This inhibits students from learning that ideas from multiple 
disciplines can be used with great success when trying to solve problems.  Focus investors should 
develop their own systems of mental models to help them make better investment decisions.  
In the following section of this article the various individual areas of knowledge that Mr. Munger 
has discussed in several of his speeches will be covered on an individual basis. This information 
should help everyone develop and enhance his or her own system of mental models.  
Mathematics 
It is critical that investors have at least an understanding of high school level mathematics.  
Compound interest, the time value of money, and the basic ideas of probability theory, for 
example, are vital concepts that all investors should have a firm grasp on; they must be a part of 
their basic repertoire of skills.  If investors fail to add these skills to their repertoire they will be at 
a severe disadvantage to others in the investing field who are equipped with these skills.  
Let’s examine more mathematical concepts that should be part of your investment toolkit.  In this 
section we will cover probability theory, decision trees, and the law of large numbers. Compound 
interest and the time value of money were covered in Part 1 of the Focus Investing Series and as 
such will not be covered here.   
Probability Theory  
“Fear of harm ought to be proportional not merely to the gravity of the harm, but also to the probability of the event [occurring]” 
Blaise Pascal  
“Take the probability of loss times the amount of possible loss from the probability of gain times the amount of possible 
gain. That is what we're trying to do. It's imperfect, but that's what it's all about.” Warren Buffett2
In 1654, Blaise Pascal, a prominent French scientist, mathematician, and philosopher, and Pierre 
de Fermat, a government official and mathematician, exchanged a series of letters that discussed 
the odds involved in games of chance. They formed in those letters the basis of what today is 
known as probability theory.  
Probability theory is the branch of mathematics that develops models to help explain random 
phenomena. Traditional questions that involve randomness include,  `will it rain today?' or `will I 
be dealt a royal flush today?’ These two questions have one common feature: the outcome (it 
rains today; being dealt a royal flush) cannot be accurately predicted on a consistent basis in 
advance, but we know that if enough days are observed, it will rain, and someone will eventually 
be dealt a royal flush.  
The practical aspects of the theory were soon realized.  For instance, the study of human mortality 
by life insurance companies resulted from applying this theory. Probability theory is now a major 
branch of mathematics with widespread applications in science and engineering.  
                                                 
2 1989 Berkshire Hathaway Annual Meeting 
Page 3 of 22

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FocusInvestor.com 
 
Focus Investing Series Part 3: Mental Models 
Probability theory also helps us manage risk.  In his excellent book, Against the Gods, Peter 
Bernstein states that the “essence of risk management lies in maximizing the areas where we have 
some control over the outcome while minimizing the areas where we have absolutely no control 
over the outcome and the linkage between effect and cause is hidden from us.” This can certainly 
be applied to investing and is why investing only within your circle of competence is so critical to 
the success of the focus investor.  
Mr. Munger has compared betting on horse races to investing in common stocks on several 
occasions. He states that the way to win at horse racing is to carefully study the individual horses 
and only betting when the odds of a given horse winning a particular race are in your favor. So in 
essence the investor should only invest when the probability of the investment outperforming the 
market indexes is high. By following this rule the investor builds a margin of safety into their 
investment decisions.  
This section of a fascinating article by Michael J. Mauboussin captures the vital points of long-
term success using probability theory3:  
• 
Focus. Professional gamblers do not play a multitude of games—they don’t stroll into a 
casino and play a little black jack, a little craps, a spend a little time on the slot machine. 
They focus on a specific game and learn the ins and outs. Similarly, most investors must 
define a circle of competence—areas of relative expertise. Seeking a competitive edge across 
a spectrum of industries and companies is a challenge, to say the least. Most great investors 
stick to their circle of competence.  
 
• 
Lots of situations. Players of probabilistic games must examine lots of situations, because the 
“market” price is usually pretty accurate. Investors, too, must evaluate lots of situations and 
gather lots of information. For example, the very successful president and CEO of Geico’s 
capital operations, Lou Simpson, tries to read 5-8 hours a day, and trades very infrequently.  
 
• 
Limited opportunities. As Thorp notes in Beat the Dealer, even when you know what you’re 
doing and play under ideal circumstances, the odds still favor you less than 10% of the time. 
And rarely does anyone play under ideal circumstances. The message for investors is even 
when you are competent, favorable situations—where you have a clear-cut variant perception 
vis-à-vis the market—don’t appear very often.  
 
• 
Ante. In the casino, you must bet every time to play. Ideally, you can bet a small amount 
when the odds are poor and a large sum when the odds are favorable, but you must ante to 
play the game. In investing, on the other hand, you need not participate when you perceive 
the expected value as unattractive, and you can bet aggressively when a situation appears 
attractive (within the constraints of an investment policy, naturally). In this way, investing is 
much more favorable than other games of probability.  
 
 
 
 
                                                 
3 Page 3 of the January 29, 2002 edition of The Consilient Observer, entitled The Babe Ruth Effect: Frequency versus Magnitude by 
Michael J. Mauboussin. Reprinted with permission of the author. 
Page 4 of 22

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FocusInvestor.com 
 
Focus Investing Series Part 3: Mental Models 
Decision Trees  
“One of the advantages of a fellow like Buffett is that he automatically thinks in terms of decision trees.” Charlie 
Munger4
Decision trees are excellent tools for helping their users choose between different courses of 
action. They provide a highly effective structure within which you can lay out possible courses of 
action and investigate the possible outcomes of choosing various actions. They also help develop 
a balanced picture of the risks and rewards associated with each possible course of action under 
examination.  
Now you are ready to evaluate the decision tree. This is where you can work out which option has 
the greatest worth to you. Start by assigning a cash value for each possible outcome – what would 
the expected value be if that particular outcome were to occur?  
Next look at each break in the tree (which represents a point of uncertainty) and estimate the 
probability of each outcome occurring. If you use percentages, the total must come to 100% at 
each circle. If you use fractions, these must add up to 1.  
Once the two aforementioned steps have been taken (i.e. the values of the outcomes have been 
entered and the probability has been estimated) it is time to start calculating the expected values 
of the various branches in the decision tree.  
Once all expected values of the outcomes have been calculated, the investor should pick the break 
of the tree that represents the highest expected value.  As you can see in the example below path 2 
would provide the highest expected value of the two paths under consideration.  
Example:  
$1.25
.60 
Path 1: .60($1.25) = .75  
Path 2: .40($2.00)= .80 
 
.40 
$2.00
Decision trees assist the investor in making effective investment decisions because they:  
• 
provide a nice picture of the problem in such a manner that all options can be observed  
• 
allow investors to analyze all the possible outcomes of a decision  
• 
provide a framework to quantify the values of various courses of action and the probabilities 
that they will occur  
• 
aid investors in their quest to make the best decisions on the basis of available information.  
 
As with all decision-making methods, decision tree analysis should be used in conjunction with 
common sense – decision trees are just one important part of the decision-making tool kit.  
 
                                                 
4 Page 50, May 5, 1995 edition of Outstanding Investor Digest 
Page 5 of 22

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FocusInvestor.com 
 
Focus Investing Series Part 3: Mental Models 
Law of Large Numbers  
 
This “law” relates to the relative frequency of an event, and the probability of the event occurring. 
These two factors need to be equal only when an infinite number of repetitions are being 
observed. In other words, reality tends towards theoretical values when the number of 
observations is large.  
Let’s examine this concept using a sample consisting of all the mutual funds in existence and 
grouping them into a bell curve by performance against a market index like the S&P 500. With a 
large number of mutual funds in the sample, some funds will dramatically underperform the 
market and some funds will dramatically outperform the market. These outliers are graphically 
represented by the tails of the bell curve.  
The farther one gets from the average return, the flatter the tail gets, but, given a large enough 
sample of funds, there will always be a group of funds that really outperform their peers and end 
up at the far ends of both tails.  In other words, these funds at the tail ends have performed far 
better than the average fund in the sample.  
The law of large numbers also has another meaning to investors. It's a matter of simple math. A 
$30 billion company will have a much more difficult time maintaining a 40% per year growth 
rate than a $30 million company growing at the same rate. 
Accounting 
Accounting is the language in which business results are reported. The ability to understand this 
language should be an integral part of every investor’s toolkit.  Focus investors can either take a 
formal class on accounting or purchase a book on the subject to educate themselves on the 
subject.  
Understanding GAAP (Generally Accepted Accounting Principles), which is the common 
language that accountants use to prepare financial statements, is not enough for focus investing 
practitioners. This is so because GAAP is a flexible system and, as such, allows company 
management a certain amount of leeway in how they report their financial results. This leeway is 
dangerous in that management can take advantage of the accounting system to show better results 
than are actually occurring.  
To learn more on what accounting red flags to watch out for I would recommend reading the 
interesting books, Guide to Financial Reporting and Analysis by Eugene E. Comiskey, Charles  
W. Mulford and Financial Shenanigans by Howard Schilit, or reading the FocusInvestor.com 
article entitled “Accounting: Focus on the Red Flags”.  
Legal System 
The legal system of the country that the investor lives in must strongly protect copyright and 
trademark information in order for a capitalist system to function properly. Entrepreneurs and 
businessmen need a proper legal system to be in place in order for them to be willing to spend the 
time, energy and commit necessary capital to build businesses. Why expend the necessary time 
and effort to develop a well-known brand name, for instance, if there is no system in place to 
protect the trademarks of the business?  
 
 
Page 6 of 22

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FocusInvestor.com 
 
Focus Investing Series Part 3: Mental Models 
The Decision-Making Process 
Asking the Who, What, When, Where, and Why Questions  
Focus investors should always attempt to solve problems and examine issues by answering the 
who, what, when, where, and why questions. Using this method to examine issues or problems 
can provide the investor with key insights into the subject matter being examined.  
Invert  
Mr. Munger also advocates thinking through problems backwards. This is similar to what Carl 
Jacobi, an eminent algebraist, was fond of saying: “Invert, always Invert”.  
In one of Mr. Munger’s speeches he gave an example of how a situation could be examined using 
he process of thinking backward. He discussed the development process of Coca-Cola as if a 
businessman wanted to create a soda company from scratch and examined the key issues that 
would need to be solved. Below are several examples of the types of questions they would have 
asked themselves:  
• 
What kind of properties should the new drink have? One property the drink should not 
have is an aftertaste. Consumers should be able to consume large quantities of the drink 
at every opportunity and not be deterred by an unpleasant aftertaste.  
• 
The soda should be developed in such a manner that it can be shipped in large quantities 
at minimal costs. This makes it easier to develop an efficient, large-scale distribution 
system.  
• 
The soda should be produced in such a manner that others will find it hard to replicate.  
To accomplish this goal, certain hard-to-find ingredients should be included in the 
formation of the soda, or the list of ingredients in the soda should be kept secret. If the 
ingredients of the product are a closely held secret it could add a certain mystique to the 
soda, as well as making it much harder for a competitor to duplicate the soda.  
• 
Keeping the formula a secret will also deter the competition that will surely be 
forthcoming if the product launches successfully.  The company can also deter 
competition by expanding the business as quickly as possible. For example, the 
distribution system could be expanded until it reaches a critical mass that competitors 
would find hard to duplicate without massive capital expenditures.  
The focus investor should always examine problems from several different perspectives. Try to 
discover what could destroy the competitive advantages of the companies under examination. The 
investor should also try to determine how these threats to the company’s competitive advantage 
could be avoided or negated. The focus investor should also try to disprove any conclusions they 
may have reached instead. This should improve their knowledge of all facets of the equation and 
help them avoid any potential mistakes made due to confirmation bias. 
 
 
Page 7 of 22

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FocusInvestor.com 
 
Focus Investing Series Part 3: Mental Models 
Statistics 
Statistics are used to examine the characteristics of a sample group. Statistics are very common. 
For example, polls are always being conducted and their results examined from a statistical 
viewpoint. The results of the polls can affect government decisions, product designs, and many 
other decisions. The DNA matching programs frequently used by the justice system to convict or 
acquit people are based on statistical analysis. In short, statistics is a science dedicated to trying to 
draw answers out of numbers.  
Mean  
The mean is one of the most common statistical concepts that investors will come across in their 
readings. To calculate the mean of a series of numbers, simply add up the values in the data set 
and then divide that sum by the number of values in the dataset.  
For example, let’s calculate the mean salary at a company with the following personal and salary 
structure:  
- The CEO of the company has a salary of $100,000 a year -Two managers make $200,000 a year 
- The firm employs two accountants who each make $45,000 each a year -The firm’s two 
secretaries earn $30,000 a year  
The mean is calculated by adding everyone’s salary together. This would equal $650,000.  The 
next step would be to divide this number by the number of values, which in this case is 7. So the 
mean salary of this company is $650,000 divided by 7, or $92,857.  
The main drawback to this concept is that any number that is unusually higher or lower than the 
rest of the series can negate the usefulness of this measurement. When the dataset is analyzed 
closely the investor will observe that only three out of the seven people earn a salary that 
approximates the mean salary. 
Standard Deviation and Normal Distribution  
Standard deviation is a concept which tells statisticians how wide apart the values in a data set are 
from one another. A large standard deviation means that the values in the data set being observed 
are fairly diverse, while a small standard deviation means the values in the data set are fairly 
tightly bunched together. This concept is a very important concept for all focus investors to 
understand.  
Standard deviation is often called the “mean of the mean” and it can often help the investor find 
the true story behind a series of numbers. To fully understand this concept it is necessary to 
explain a concept that statisticians call normal distribution.  
When statisticians say that the data they are examining shows a normal distribution, they are 
saying that most of the values in a set of data being examined are close to the average of the data 
series and only a small set of the data are far beyond the average.  
For example, let’s imagine that a statistician was conducting research on the sleeping habits of 
adult males. They would need to examine the normal sleeping habits of a large group of adult 
males to represent the data set. Like most data, the average time adult males spend sleeping per 
night will probably turn out to be normally distributed. That is, for most adult males, their nightly 
Page 8 of 22

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FocusInvestor.com 
 
Focus Investing Series Part 3: Mental Models 
sleeping habits are closely aligned to the median sleeping habits of adult males in general, with 
only a small amount of adult ma les sleeping longer or shorter than the average of the overall 
group.  
The results of the data seem to confirm what most people would understand implicitly. Most 
people would assume the general population of adult males would have similar sleeping patterns, 
with only a minority of people sleeping a great deal longer or shorter than the average.  
This 1889 quote by Francis Galton, a famous pioneer of statistical correlation and regression, 
describes the macro view of standard distribution: “Whenever a large sample of chaotic elements 
are taken in hand and marshaled in the order of their magnitude, an unsuspected and most 
beautiful form of regularity proves to have been latent all along.”  
If a set of normally distributed data were shown in a graphical format, it would resemble a 
standard bell-curve shape.  When the standard deviations in a data set being examined are tightly 
bunched together, the bell shape will have steep curves and, conversely, the bell shape will be 
relatively flat if the standard deviations are not tightly bunched together.   
Many investors have heard the expression “six sigma”. Six Sigma is a “highly disciplined process 
that helps us focus on developing and delivering near-perfect products and services. Why 
‘Sigma’? The word is a statistical term that measures how far a given process deviates from 
perfection. The central idea behind Six Sigma is that if one can measure how many "defects" 
there are in a process, one can systematically figure out how to eliminate them and get as close to 
"zero defects" as possible.”5
Focus investors strive to be Six Sigma investors.  
Regression to the Mean  
Regression to the mean is a statistical phenomenon in which high or low results tend to be 
followed by more average results. In the 1800s Sir Francis Galton observed this phenomenon 
when he planted sweet pea seeds and calculated the average diameter of 100 seeds produced by 
each plant. He discovered that the seed diameters tended to “regress toward the mean,” meaning 
that the smaller pea seeds had somewhat larger offspring, and larger seeds had somewhat smaller 
offspring.  
One word of caution is in order for focus investors. They should remember that the regression to 
the mean concept, when applied to the selection of common stocks, is a statistical explanation and 
not an economic one.  
Engineering 
Backup Systems  
In engineering, for critical systems which absolutely have to work, a backup system is put in 
place every time. This redundancy helps to ensure that the system continues to operate even if 
part of it fails.  The same thought process implies to focus investing as well.  
Investors must make a series of decisions when examining companies, with an eye towards 
possibly making an investment. They have to determine the economics of the business and what 
                                                 
5 http://www.ge.com/sixsigma/makingcustomers.html 
Page 9 of 22

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FocusInvestor.com 
 
Focus Investing Series Part 3: Mental Models 
the company will produce in future cash flows, for instance. The margin of safety principle is the 
focus investor’s backup system. The margin of safety principle basically states that an investment 
should be made when the price of the stock in question reflects a worst-case scenario, so that even 
if the investor’s projections are wrong he or she won’t experience a dramatic loss in capital.  
Breakpoints  
All focus investors should possess an in-depth understanding of the company they have invested 
in, but they should also be wary of the dangers of over-analyzing information.  In the investment 
process, it is important to remember that the number of decisions to be made should be kept as 
small as possible.  
This is one reason that traders in stock never seem to earn an acceptable long-term return on their 
investments. They simply have to make too many decisions correctly on a consistent basis to have 
the effort prove worthwhile.  
Does this seem to be an odd statement? Think of it this way: the more decisions that have to be 
made when conducting the investment process, the higher the possibility that an error will be 
made. Avoiding undue complexity whenever possible should be the motto of all focus investors. 
Remember the old maxim: KISS (Keep it Simple Stupid).  
Physics 
Physics is the realm of science that investigates how the universe functions. In a classic example 
of combined mental models, Sir Isaac Newton, one of the most famous physicists in history, 
explained the properties of gravity using two earlier discoveries.  In order to produce his thoughts 
on the properties of gravity, he combined the laws of planetary motion with the observation that a 
falling mass accelerates at a uniform pace.  
The Theory of Equilibrium  
Economics uses the equilibrium theory; for example, when demand equals supply the market is in 
balance. Economists use this theory as a base explanation for how the markets are supposed to 
work. The efficient market theory is an example of thinking, since it states that stock pr ices and 
their intrinsic values always trade in equilibrium in the market. While that theory is incorrect, it is 
fair to say that stocks prices do tend, for the most part, to trade around their respective intrinsic 
values.  
The market is really a complex adaptive system in which many intertwining parts continually 
change behavior patterns in response to changing environmental stimuli. The stock market is 
continually processing new information (i.e. new environmental stimuli) and, as such, can never 
be in a state of equilibrium.  For focus investors this means that at times the market as a whole 
can present investors with valuations that are higher or lower than a company’s intrinsic value.  
Critical Mass  
In nuclear physics, critical mass is the minimum amount of fissile material necessary to achieve a 
self-sustaining fission chain reaction (i.e. explosion).  Great changes in the thinking of the masses 
generally do not occur at a single moment in time, but rather develop over time as a progression 
of events and developments which influence people’s thinking.  As time goes on these ideas seem 
Page 10 of 22

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FocusInvestor.com 
 
Focus Investing Series Part 3: Mental Models 
to develop more and more momentum, until a critical mass is reached and the new change is 
adapted.  
 
In business this idea can be observed when a business undergoes a fundamental change in regard 
to operations that leads to a reduction in cost per unit resulting from increased production, often 
realized through operational efficiencies.  
These economies of scale can be observed in full force at Coca-Cola.  No company could 
replicate their distribution system and thus be able to match their pricing, unless they were to 
spend billions of dollars. The achievement of critical mass usually means that the company 
achieving it has some type of competitive advantage over its competitors.  
Know Yourself & Understand Motivation Factors 
When examining a decision or when trying to determine what course of action people may take, it 
is vitally important to understand what motivates the interested parties. For instance, the stock 
brokerage profession has many built-in negative motivational factors.  Most brokers only get paid 
on a per trade basis, which, in turn increases their motivation to have their clients trade on a 
frequent basis. Of course the vast majority of brokers avoid this behavior, but their motivation 
structure is set up in such a manner that it has inherent conflicts built into it.  
Focus investors should also understand their circle of competence and stay within it. They should 
be honest with themselves concerning which business models they understand and which ones 
they don’t. 
Economics 
Economics is a field of study that examines how society manages its scarce resources. 
Economists therefore try to determine how people make decisions, based on their salary, their 
buying and saving habits, and how they allocate their savings. Economists also study how buyers 
and sellers of particular goods determine the price that a good will sell at and what quantities of 
the goods will sell at the agreed-upon price.  Finally economists analyze issues that affect the 
economy as a whole.  
In the textbook Principles of Macroeconomics, by N. Gregory Mankiw lists ten principles 
of economics. The first six principles are relevant to this article.  
1. 
People Face Tradeoffs. In order to possess the objects that we desire we choose to 
 
possess those objects over other, less desirable objects.  
 
2. 
The Cost of Something is What You Give Up to Get It. Since people must make tradeoffs 
to possess what they desire, they must make decisions by comparing the costs and 
benefits of various courses of action. The opportunity cost of possessing an object is what 
was given up to obtain another object.  
 
3. 
Rational People Think at the Margin. Often in life individuals must make small changes 
to their existing plans.  Economists call these small changes marginal changes.  
 
4. 
People Respond to Incentives. Individuals make their decisions after examining the costs 
and benefits of various courses of action. People’s behavior can change dramatically in 
response to incentives.  
Page 11 of 22

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FocusInvestor.com 
 
Focus Investing Series Part 3: Mental Models 
 
5. 
Trade Can Make Everyone Better Off. Trade between multiple parties can result in all 
     
parties being better off.  
 
6. 
Markets are Usually a Good Way to Organize Economic Activity. In a market economy, 
resources are allocated via the decentralized decisions of all the members of the 
economy.  
 
Before we discuss economics in depth we should carefully examine an observation made by 
Charlie Munger during a speech he gave at the University of California, Santa Barbara 
concerning the field of economics. He discussed several concepts but I want to highlight one of
them, “Physics Envy”.  He described this concept as “the craving for a false precision, i.e. the
desire to have a formula.”  Mr. Munger went on to say that precision “is not going to happen by
and large in economics.  It’s too complex a system.  And the craving for that physics-style
precision does nothing but get you into terrible trouble.”  It is a important concept to keep in mind
when trying to make investment decision. 
The following is a list of key economic concepts:  
Law of Supply and Demand  
The law of demand states that there is an inverse relationship between the price of a good and the 
quantity of the good demanded. The income level of the buyer, the price of the good and the 
availability of substitutes are all factors that influence the level of demand.  
The law of supply states that there is a positive relationship between the price of a good and the 
quantity supplied.  The price levels of the good, the costs of inputs to produce the good, and the 
technological costs to produce a good are all factors that influence the level of the goods supplied.  
Income and Substitution Effects  
Substitutes are goods that experience an increase in demand when another similar product 
increases in price.  
A fall in the price of a commodity, or good, generally has two effects on a consumer’s income:  
Substitution Effect:  
- 
The consumer enjoys an increase in real purchasing power since they he or she can now buy  
the same amount of the product as before with less money and thus have money left over for  
additional expenditures or savings.  
Income Effect:  
- 
The consumer could conceivably use more of a good that has become less expensive and not 
use as much of the goods that are now relatively more expensive.  
Although these effects occur simultaneously, a distinction can be made between the two. The first 
statement is what is called the substitution effect. The substitution effect measures the change in 
the purchase of a good resulting only from the change in the price of the good. In this case the 
utility (i.e. satisfaction) that the consumer receives from the good remains constant even though 
the price has changed.  
Page 12 of 22

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FocusInvestor.com 
 
Focus Investing Series Part 3: Mental Models 
The income effect is the change in the consumption patterns of a good that results from the 
change in purchasing power that occurs as a result of the price change. In the preceding case the 
price of the relatively more expensive product has reduced its utility.  
Scarcity  
Scarcity is a key concept in economics.  The concept relates to the fact that there is only a 
limited supply of goods available for purchase.  
 
Utility & Rationality  
 
Economists assume that people will always try to maximize their happiness; in other words, that 
people will always try to obtain goods that maximize their utility. Economists assume that people 
behave in a rational manner and make rational choices.  
Elasticity  
Elasticity is the measurement of how sensitive a variable is in relation to another variable. These 
measurements are used to test the effect on demand and supply when there are changes in prices 
and incomes.  
The concept of price elasticity of demand measures the responsiveness of changes in quantity 
demanded to price changes of a given product.  Goods that have a price elasticity of less than 1 
are said to be inelastic. Goods that have a price elasticity greater than 1 are said to be elastic. 
Necessities such as water are said to be inelastic since the demand remains much the same, even 
if the price of the product increases dramatically.  
Income elasticity of demand is the same concept as price elasticity of demand, except that income 
changes and not price changes are measured.  
Monopolies  
A monopoly is a market structure in which only one producer, or seller, exists for a product. This 
domination of a market for a particular product or service by a single company tends to lead to 
restricted levels of competition and artificially high prices on a sustained basis.  
Generally the product being sold has no close substitutes for consumers to switch to.  Monopolies 
are typically characterized by the following: one firm supplies the market with many buyers and 
sellers; the product being sold is unique; the firm has strong pricing power; and entry into the 
market is restricted in some manner.  
Oligopoly  
Oligopolies consist of several firms that are in the same market and generally compete on features 
other than price. Price wars, where all the market players slash prices, tend simply to lead to 
lower profits for all the firms, leaving the overall market shares of the companies little changed.  
Instead, oligopolistic firms tend to compete, for instance, through advertising, product or service 
quality. Companies that form the oligopoly are generally safe from new companies entering the 
market because the barriers to entry to the market are high. 
Page 13 of 22

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FocusInvestor.com 
 
Focus Investing Series Part 3: Mental Models 
Economies of Scale 
The advantages that economies of scale bring to businesses are terribly important to most 
companies. One has to look no further than Gillette or Coca-Cola to see what benefits having a 
large, dependable manufacturing division, coupled with an efficient distribution system, can bring 
to a company.  
Think of Gillette. The company has an approximately 70% share of the global wet shaving 
market.  It would not have been able to do this without an efficient manufacturing process and the 
ability to ship its products globally on an affordable basis. Any company trying to match them 
would have to spend billions of dollars to match these economies of scale.  
Pavlovian Conditioning 
Almost everyone, on hearing the term “Pavlovian”, thinks of the famous canine experiment. In 
the experiment a dog was conditioned to expect food when a light was turned on. Eventually the 
dog would start salivating as soon as the light was turned on, even if no food was present.  
From birth, all animals, and humans are equipped with a limited set of reflexes, i.e. genetically 
hard-wired responses to specific environmental stimuli. A reflex is a relationship between a 
specific environmental event (i.e. stimulus) and a fixed behavioral action (i.e. response) that it 
evokes. These reflexes are often a key factor in survival.  
Pavlovian association is generally broken down into several classifications: Classic, Operant and 
Instrumental Conditioning. These are discussed in detail below  
Classic Conditioning  
Classic conditioning is when a stimulus is experienced that elicits an emotional response time 
after time. For example, imagine past visits to a grandparent’s home, where it always seemed to 
smell of mothballs. Now if every time you smell mothballs you recall visiting your grandparent’s 
home, that is an example of classic conditioning.  
This concept ties into the concept of association. Think of Coca-Cola commercials.  Do you ever 
see the actors in the commercials not having a good time? Of course not. Coca-Cola is 
deliberately associating drinking Coca-Cola with good times and feelings.  The company tries to 
connect happiness with drinking Coca-Cola in its ad campaigns.  
Instrumental Conditioning  
Instrumental conditioning occurs when the subject chooses to continue, or discontinue, a behavior 
based upon the positive or negative reinforcement the subject has received. Trademarks that have 
developed a positive image tend to generate positive thoughts to their current and prospective 
consumers, which help in future sales opportunities.  
A great example of Pavlovian association would be when the sales of a product increase when the 
price of the product is raised higher than comparable products.  One reason that the increase in 
sales occurs is that most people associate higher prices with higher quality.  
 
Page 14 of 22

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FocusInvestor.com 
 
Focus Investing Series Part 3: Mental Models 
Operant Conditioning  
Operant conditioning involves associative learning, in which there is a contingency between the 
response and the presentation of the reinforcer. For example, this concept can be seen in the 
classic experiments by Frederick Skinner, where he trained rats and pigeons to press a lever in 
order to obtain a food reward. His experiments prove that behavior can be modified with the use 
of rewards.  
Mr. Munger gave a powerful example of how a reward system can influence behavior when he 
discussed Xerox. He stated, “Early in the history of Xerox, Joe Wilson, who was then in the 
government, had to go back to Xerox because he couldn't understand how their better, new 
machine was selling so poorly in relation to their older and inferior machine. Of course when he 
got there he found out that the commission arrangement with the salesmen gave a tremendous 
incentive to the inferior machine.”6
Competitive Destruction 
The best industry for investment is an industry in which the participants act in a rational manner. 
Oligopolies work best for an investor when this is the case. When the companies in a particular 
industry choose not to act in a rational manner, competitive destruction can be observed.  An 
example of this type of behavior can be observed by examining the airline industry. When one 
airline went into bankruptcy protection it was allowed to keep operating at a loss, thereby hurting 
the performance of the rest of the companies in the industry.  
Another example of this destructive behavior in the airline industry was observed when it became 
standard practice in the industry to offer free airline miles to frequent fliers.  These programs 
worked well initially for the creator of the programs but they became an industry problem when 
the other airlines initiated their own programs. These new programs often provided better options 
in order to induce people to switch programs which in turn forced the other airlines to upgrade 
their programs.  
The first airline to initiate a frequent flyer program likely experienced a temporary increase in 
sales and profits but at the end of the day the programs resulted in decreased profits for all airlines 
that developed their own programs.  
Surfing 
Individuals tend to become caught up in the latest crazes. For an example of this look at the 
Beanie Baby craze. People were waiting in line for hours to purchase the toys when they arrived 
in stores and were selling them for many times their retail value on the Internet, even though they 
knew that they had no true value in the long run.  
The Internet stock craze was another example of this behavior. People starting buying up the 
stocks because they had been spectacularly outperforming the market. The mass migration into 
these stocks then pushed the price even higher, and more and more people saw the incredible rise 
in market valuations and decided to jump into the act as well.  Eventually the bubble was sure to 
burst. Investors must form and act on their own conclusions and not blindly follow the behavior 
of the crowd.  
                                                 
6 http://www.tilsonfunds.com/mungerpsych.html 
Page 15 of 22

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FocusInvestor.com 
 
Focus Investing Series Part 3: Mental Models 
The Stock Pari-Mutuel System 
Mr. Munger has compared investing to betting on the horse races on several occasions.  The 
similarity between investing and gambling is that in both instances the person is estimating the 
probabilities of possible outcomes occurring and only investing or waging when the probabilities 
are judged to be positive. 
 
The gambler studies the past behavior of the horses in a given race and only places a bet when he 
believes the odds of a given horse winning have been mispriced and he can take advantage of his 
situation. He is also taking into account the potential payoff should the horse he picks win.  
 
The focus investor is performing the same activities. They are studying the economics of various 
businesses and assessing at what price would investing in that business provide the highest 
possibility of above average, long-term gains.  Focus investors should only make investments 
when the odds are strongly in their favor, since they are maintaining concentrated portfolios.  
 
Psychology of Investing 
This section was covered at length in the second part of the focus investing series. Several 
subjects that weren’t discussed will be covered here. One of those subjects that weren’t covered 
was the concept of social proof.  
Social Proof  
Social proof occurs when individuals attempt to confirm their previously developed assumptions 
on any given subject.  This is a natural product of how we tend to learn through imitation of 
others’ actions and behaviors. This learning style, however, can cause problems for investors 
because the behavior of the crowd can be dead wrong.  
Denial  
Denial is another area that wasn’t explicitly covered.  This can happen when someone learns of 
an occurrence that is too terrible for him or her to comprehend easily, so they refuse to believe 
that the occurrence really happened. This behavior is often observed when a family member is 
accused of a heinous crime. Often the initial reaction of other family members is to state firmly 
that the accused family member would never be capable of committing such a crime.  
Consistency  
Humans are often trapped into certain behavior patterns because they have already committed to 
believing that those behavior patterns are correct, and they feel that if they change their behavior 
they will be judged to be inconsistent and indecisive. Psychologists have long recognized a desire 
in most people to be and look consistent in their words, beliefs, attitudes, and deeds.  
Reciprocation Tendency  
Reciprocation is the tendency to want to pay back someone who has done something for you. 
This is a very strong psychological phenomenon. Individuals are often far more willing to provide 
information or assistance to someone who has helped them or provided advice to them in the past.  
Page 16 of 22

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FocusInvestor.com 
 
Focus Investing Series Part 3: Mental Models 
Another aspect of this tendency can be seen when people initially ask for a big favor and then, if 
that is not granted, they ask for a smaller favor (often what they really wanted).  This other party 
will often agree to the smaller favor, since they feel bad for refusing the big favor and also wish 
to appear to be reasonable.  
 
Authority  
 
From birth, our society trains everyone to respect people of perceived authority, whether that 
authority is real or not. People are much more willing to believe a statement when it comes from 
someone they believe is an authority on the matter. People are also much more willing to go 
along with actions taken by an authority figure, even if know that the action is inappropriate.  
 
Scarcity  
 
Quite simply, people desire objects that are hard to obtain. Robert Cialdini advises, “the rule of 
scarcity tells us that people are especially persuaded and motivated, not so much by what they 
stand to gain but by what they stand to lose if they don’t do something (e.g., act now, attend a 
function). That loss is more powerful psychologically.”  
Focus investors need to learn to think for themselves and not be lulled into practicing mindless 
and reflective behavior just because that is what “everyone” is doing. Focus investors also need to 
understand the natural bias to be highly accepting of information that confirms their thoughts or 
beliefs. They should instead think of looking for information that doesn’t jive with the theories 
that are developing on a subject matter.  
Chemistry 
Autocatalysis  
In chemistry, when certain processes (or reactions) start to occur, they can speed up of their own 
accord when they are combined with a catalyst. The catalyst tends to stabilize the reaction and 
makes it easier for the process to jump to another level. The catalyst itself usually is not affected 
by the process and can go and influence many other reactions.  For example, when a couple wants 
to get married they have an official legalize the marriage, but the official otherwise does not 
participate in the marriage. 
 
In the autocatalysis process, properties, events or products serve as their own catalysts and are 
"self-breeding". For example, the invention of the air conditioner created the need for air 
conditioning, hence the self-stimulated increase in the demand for air conditioners. 
 
Biology 
“The slightest advantage in one being … over those with which it comes into competition, or better adaptation in however slight 
a degree to the surrounding physical conditions, will turn the balance.” On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection 
by Charles Darwin.  
Natural Selection  
The theory of evolution is the key biological concept that focus investors need to understand.  
Charles Darwin developed his theory of natural selection by carefully observing wildlife during 
his trip aboard the HMS Beagle.  
Page 17 of 22

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FocusInvestor.com 
 
Focus Investing Series Part 3: Mental Models 
While visiting the Galapagos Islands, he observed that each of the islands supported its own form 
of tortoise, mockingbird, and finch. He further observed that the various individual species were 
closely related but differed in structure and eating habits from one island to the next. These 
observations caused Darwin to question if there weren’t in fact possible links between the distinct 
but similar species.  
After much discussion with other scientists on why, and how, the species on the island were so 
similar, he developed a theory that natural selection could produce variations that had some 
benefit to a species and its survival. These variations, and their subsequent benefits to the species, 
would be passed on to succeeding generations.  
How does this relate to the investment process? I believe Robert Hagstrom, in his book 
Latticework: The New Investing, explained it well when he wrote, “Whereas in nature the process 
of evolution is one of natural selection, seeing the market with an evolutionary framework allows 
us to observe the law of economic selection.”    
This law of economic selection is easily observed in the business world. For example, one firm 
may develop a unique way of producing a product in a less expensive manner, which allows it to 
generate higher profits than other firms that are in the same line of business but are not using this 
new procedure. Hence, conceivably, the firm using the less expensive procedure should sell for a 
higher multiple than its competitors.  
Survival by Differentiation  
In the 1930s the Soviet scientist G.F. Gause conducted an experiment in which he placed two 
protozoans of different species into a glass jar with a limited amount of food. He also placed two 
protozoans of the same species into the same situation. He discovered that the protozoans of 
different species survived by sharing their food source, while the protozoans of the same species 
were unable to cooperate and did not survive.  
In the business world the companies that have sustainable competitive advantages have somehow 
differentiated themselves from their competition.  They may have a lower cost structure, superior 
customer service, superior quality, or a more efficient distribution system, for example.  
Lollapalooza Effect 
The idea of developing and using your own network of mental models reaches its logical and 
powerful apex when they are combined to form lollapalooza effects. A lollapalooza effect occurs 
when several models in the network are combined and are heading in the same direction to 
produce a given result. The results of this combined effect can be quite dramatic.  For instance, in 
order to suppress and combat the HIV virus, a drug “cocktail” was developed. While the 
individual drugs weren’t effective, the combination of several medications was extremely 
effective.  
Another example of a lollapalooza effect can be seen in open outcry auctions.  Mr. Munger 
summed up these effects in this statement: “the open-outcry auction is just made to turn the brain 
into mush: you've got social proof, the other guy is bidding, you get reciprocation tendency, you 
get deprival super-reaction syndrome, the thing is going away… I mean it just absolutely is 
designed to manipulate people into idiotic behavior.”7
                                                 
7 http://www.tilsonfunds.com/mungerpsych.html 
Page 18 of 22

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FocusInvestor.com 
 
Focus Investing Series Part 3: Mental Models 
 
The key to understanding and creating lollapalooza effects is being able to understand how sets of 
models relate to one another. Once this relation is understood, the next step is to build an 
understanding of what effect the combination will have on a given situation.  
 
Focus investors should avoid compartmentalizing all incoming information into separate, distinct 
mental compartments. Investors will prove to be much more successful in life and investing if 
they explore how separate pieces of information interact and use this newly gleaned information 
to solve future issues. Keep in mind that just because a piece of incoming information is 
connected to one process, it doesn’t mean that the concept behind it can’t be applied to other 
processes.  
 
In his speech on Coca-Cola to a Stanford Law School class, Mr. Munger gave a fascinating 
example of how using various mental models in combination can produce incredible lollapalooza 
effects. I will attempt the capture the key concepts of the speech as they relate to the lollapalooza 
effect in the creation of the classic soda beverage, Coca-Cola.  
Mr. Munger initiated the discussion on the creation of Coca-Cola by asking if the drink should be 
a hot or a cold beverage. The first mental model used to answer this question was the physics 
model, because the creator of the beverage would have had to foresee that refrigeration of the 
product would be widely available in the future.  
The second mental model involved was physiology, since the maker of the drink needed to 
understand that individuals preferred to drink a cold beverage after engaging in strenuous activity.  
In addition, an individual residing in a hot climate would naturally prefer drinking a cold 
beverage when looking for relief from the heat.  
After the decision had been made to produce a cold drink, the next issue involved creating a 
strong and well-known brand so the beverage could distinguish itself from its competition.  In 
developing the brand, the creators needed to be confident that the legal system in place would 
protect them against competition infringing on their brand name.  
Any company should endeavor to make the brand so familiar to its customers that they 
automatically order the drink by its trademark name. This is a desired conditioned reflex. In its 
marketing campaign the company should always associate their product with people experiencing 
happy times, thereby taking advantage of Pavlovian association effects.  
It was decided that the drink itself should use ingredients that reinforce the desire to drink more 
of the soda. The stimulant caffeine and sugar should be used to flavor. The properties of these 
ingredients would combine and help the users of the product develop a favorable taste for the 
drink. An additional important factor was that the overall flavor profile of the beverage should not 
include an aftertaste. This would negatively affect the drinking experience and could cut down 
the quantities that users would be willing to consume.  
In addition to the flavor properties, the visual properties of the drink were enhanced. The first step 
in this process was to give the drink a dark color to make it more appealing than the plainness of 
water. Carbonation was also added to provide a better taste and make the product seem more 
visually appealing.  
The product should be in a form that can be easily shipped. This was a problem for Coca-Cola as 
the weight and dimensions of the soda and bottles combined made it expensive to transport. Their 
Page 19 of 22

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FocusInvestor.com 
 
Focus Investing Series Part 3: Mental Models 
solution was to only sell syrup. They sold sales territories and developed a system of bottlers and 
shipped only the syrup for the soda to the bottlers. The bottlers were then responsible for 
transporting the final product to customers in their respective territories. This allowed Coca-Cola 
to save on shipping costs and maintain control of the ingredients in their products.  
Once the above steps in the development process had been completed, the company needed to 
develop an effective marketing strategy. The company gave many marketing products to 
establishments that used their beverages so they could display them in their establishments. The 
clients of those establishments would then know Coca-Cola was available.  The company even 
gave away free sample coupons so new users would sample their product. Social proof was one 
reason for doing this. When one person observes another consuming the product, they are 
unconsciously showing other people that they like and enjoy the product.  
I hope you observed all the different aspects of the mental models at work in the above example. 
As the history of the Coca-Cola Company has shown, building a business and products with a 
strong lollapalooza effect can produce incredible investment returns.  
 
Another lollapalooza effect can occur when you combine two of Mr. Munger’s concepts: 
“Physics Envy” and “Man with a Hammer Syndrome”.  As he said during a 2003 speech at the 
University of California, “[this behavior is] really terrible in business [because] you’ve got a 
complex system and it spews out a lot of wonderful numbers [that] enable you to measure some 
factors.  But there are other factors that are terribly important.  There’s no precise numbering 
where you can put to these factors.  You know they’re important [but] you don’t have the 
numbers.  Well practically everybody just overweighs the stuff that can be numbered, because it 
yields to the statistical techniques they’re taught in places like this, and doesn’t mix in the hard-
to-measure stuff that may be more important.  That is a mistake I’ve tried all my life to avoid, and 
I have no regrets for having done that.” 
 
The focus investor with a firm grasp of the mental models concept is a gigantic step ahead of the 
majority of investors.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 22

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FocusInvestor.com 
 
Focus Investing Series Part 3: Mental Models 
Conclusion 
To wrap up the discussion on mental models, here is a list of five “ultra-simple general notions” 
that Mr. Munger provided in a 1996 speech. These notions, listed below, tie into the mental 
models concept discussed in this article. The notions are:  
1. Solve the big no-brainer questions first.  
2. Use math to support your reasoning.  
3. Think through a problem backward, not just forward.  
4. Use a multidisciplinary approach.  
5. Properly consider results from a combination of factors, or lollapalooza effects.  
 
Focus investors should develop their own network of models that work best for them.  They 
should always seek to increase their network of knowledge with information from a wide 
spectrum of disciplines. The most successful focus investors will, more than likely, be 
enthusiastic readers of widely varying subject matters, but only choose to retain ideas that prove 
to be useful in building their network of mental models.  
I hope this article provides you with a strong foundation for starting your own model 
development process. I also hope that the material presented in the focus investing series has 
helped you understand the focus investing process, and the advantages it has for investors who 
are able to think rationally and make decisions free from the influences of herd behavior.  
Please feel free to contact me via email at rich@focusinvestor.com or engage in further 
discussion on the subject of focus investing on the FocusInvestor.com message board at 
http://www.focusinvestor.com/cgi-bin/forum/ikonboard.cgi
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© Copyright 2000-2004, FocusInvestor.com. All rights reserved.  This material is for personal use only. Republication and re-
dissemination, including posting to news groups, is expressly prohibited without the prior written consent of FocusInvestor.com.  
 
 
Page 21 of 22

--- PAGE BREAK ---

FocusInvestor.com 
 
Focus Investing Series Part 3: Mental Models 
Bibliography:  
 
Against the Gods (1996) by Peter Bernstein  
 
Damn Right! (2000) by Janet Lowe  
 
Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion (1993) by Dr. Robert Cialdini 
 
 Latticework: The New Investing (2000) by Robert Hagstrom  
 
The Warren Buffett Portfolio (1999) by Robert Hagstrom  
 
The Warren Buffett Way (1994) by Robert Hagstrom  
 
The Triumph of Bits (1999) by Michael Mauboussin, Alexander Schay, and Stephen Kawaja 
 
A Lesson on Elementary, Worldly Wisdom as it Relates to Investment Management and Business 
by Charlie Munger in the May 5, 1995 edition of Outstanding Investor Digest  
 
Business: What Lawyers Should Know by Charlie Munger, in the Dec. 21, 1997 edition of the 
Outstanding Investor Digest  
 
Psychology of Human Misjudgment (1995) by Charlie Munger. Speech given at Harvard  
University. Transcribed and edited by Whitney Tilson. 
 
The Consilient Observer, January 29, 2002 edition, The Babe Ruth Effect: Frequency versus 
Magnitude by Michael J. Mauboussin  
 
Principles of Macroeconomics (1997) by N. Gregory Mankiw  
 
The Natural Laws of Business (2001) by Richard Koch  
Page 22 of 22