www.santangels.com
Santangel’s Investor Forum
October 25, 2012
New York City
Charlie Munger at  
Harvard-Westlake School 
January 19, 2010
[This conversation about the financial crisis, moderated by Jim Gibson,  
took place at a fundraising event for the Harvard-Westlake preparatory school,  
where Charlie Munger is a longtime trustee.]   
www.santangelsreview.com
Let’s just go through the list, briefly. 
Academia failed. The professors at our 
greatest universities [have] perfectly 
asinine ideas -- first, about efficient 
market theory. One of those people 
influenced McKinsey [& Company] 
so much that McKinsey came to the 
Washington Post at the time it was 
selling at one-fifth of what it was 
plainly worth as a share of the total 
enterprise, and said, ‘You can’t buy 
[the stock] in because, under efficient 
market theory, it can’t be worth a fifth 
of what people would pay for the whole 
company.’ Of course, the kind of mind 
that would keep a stupid idea like this 
when they have a fact that would clearly 
refute it -- it clearly violates traditions 
of science and mental decency. They 
taught this drivel to our children for 
decades and, by God, a lot of people 
these other people if I just kind of work 
at it steadily for a long time,’ and that 
is what I did.
I think part of the popularity of 
Berkshire Hathaway is that we look like 
people who have found a trick. It’s not 
brilliance. It’s just avoiding stupidity. 
You say it is the same thing just stated 
differently -- well, maybe it is the same 
thing just stated differently. But you 
understand it better if you go at it the 
way we do, which is to identify the 
main stupidities that do bright people 
in and then organize your patterns for 
thinking and developments, so you 
don’t stumble into those stupidities. Of 
course, this present situation involves 
massive cognitive failure at a great 
number of places dominated by very, 
very bright people, and that is quite 
interesting.
Jim Gibson: 
Charlie, why did so many smart people 
get it wrong? 
Charlie Munger:
Well, that is a marvelous question and 
it is such a marvelous question that I 
have devoted a big chunk of my life 
to studying that exact question. It was 
obvious to me for some reason, at an 
early age, that a great many very brilliant 
and disciplined people made perfectly 
screwy decisions that were disastrous -- 
and that it happened, frankly, wherever 
I looked. I found this extremely curious, 
and somehow early in life I got the idea 
that I would never be able to play chess 
blindfolded against six Grandmasters 
and win. God just did not give Charlie 
Munger any such skill. But I said, ‘Oh 
my gosh, I cannot be as asinine as all 
Transcription of this presentation provided by:

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Charlie Munger at Harvard-Westlake | 2
www.santangelsreview.com
don’t have any coins that are worth a 
lot, that have precious metals that you 
can melt down. Nobody cares what the 
melt-down value of the quarter is in 
relationship to the dime, so Gresham’s 
Law is a non-starter in the modern 
world. Bad money drives out good. 
But the new form of Gresham’s Law 
is ungodly important. The new form 
of Gresham’s Law is brought into 
play - in economic thought, anyway - 
in the savings and loans crisis, when 
it was perfectly obvious that bad 
lending drives out good. Think of how 
powerful that model is. Think of the 
disaster that it creates for everybody. 
You sit there in your little institution. 
All of the builders [are not good 
credits anymore], and you are in the 
business of lending money to builders. 
Unless you do the same idiotic thing 
[as] Joe Blow is doing down the street. 
Pete Johnson up the street wants to 
do something a little dumber and the 
thing just goes to a mighty tide. You’ve 
got to shrink the business that you love 
and maybe lay off the employees who 
have trusted you their careers and so 
forth or [make] a lot of dumb loans. At 
Berkshire Hathaway we try and let the 
place shrink. We never fire anybody, 
we tell them to go out and play golf. 
We sure as hell don’t want to make any 
dumb loans. But that is very hard to 
do if you sit in a leadership position in 
society with people you helped recruit, 
you meet their wives and children and 
so forth. The bad loans drive out the 
good.
It isn’t just bad loans. Bad morals drive 
out the good. If you want to run a 
check-cashing agency in [a] downtown 
big city, more than 100 percent of 
all the profit you could possibly earn 
can only be earned by flim-flamming 
people on the finance contracts. So 
if you aren’t willing to cheat people - 
basically minorities - more than 100 
to the other drivel that was discussed, 
opportunity cost deserves more than 
one sentence. 
Berkshire Hathaway is constantly 
kicking off ideas [audio unintelligible] in 
about two seconds flat. We know we’ve 
got opportunity X, which is better 
than the new opportunity. Why do we 
want to waste two seconds thinking 
about the new opportunity? Many 
of you come from places that don’t 
do that. You’ve got to have one horse, 
one rabbit, one something or rather, 
and that rabbit is going to be thinking 
about something which would be ruled 
out immediately by an opportunity 
cost available generally to the place – 
but, it’s a different department. You 
have to be diversified and so on and so 
on. It’s easy to drift into this idea that 
opportunities don’t matter, you’ve got 
so many different ways of doing things 
that are better. It isn’t better. 
The right way to make decisions 
in practical life is based on your 
opportunity cost. When you get 
married, you have to choose the best 
[spouse] you can find that will have 
you. The rest of life is the same damn 
way. You have to figure these things out 
if you want good results in life, and if 
you don’t, well, you have to pretend that 
you can get good results in life. If you 
have enough sales ability, maybe you 
can get by with it. 
At any rate, these ridiculous ideas came 
out of academia. This wasn’t true in 
engineering and arts and science by the 
way. The idiotic ideas are all from the 
social science department and I would 
put economics in the social sciences 
department although it has some tinges 
of reality that remind you of arts and 
science. 
In economics textbooks they teach you 
Gresham’s Law: Bad money drives 
out good. But we don’t have any bad 
money that amounts to anything. We 
are still doing it. It was in the major 
textbooks in economics and people as 
smart as Paul Samuelson [believed it] 
-- and that is a significantly smart man. 
How do smart people get such dumb 
ideas and hold them so long? I’ll try 
to come back to that theme after I’ve 
enumerated more examples.
Then these ideas from economics 
drifted into corporate finance, and they 
got the capital asset pricing model -- 
also pure drivel. They taught it to all of 
our children and the law schools picked 
it up. They didn’t understand it, but 
they could repeat it like a mantra from 
Buddhism, and people would learn it 
and regurgitate it on the examinations 
and they’d get As and so forth. Of 
course, they got out into the real world 
and they were menaces to decency and 
sound thinking. That didn’t bother the 
people at Harvard [University] or any 
of the people that were doing it. And 
you say, how can smart people do such 
immensely dumb things?
You don’t have to make this stuff up. 
Life will constantly surprise you with 
these ridiculous examples which teach 
important lessons. These are seriously 
smart people who took up with Paul 
Samuelson. Alan Greenspan is a 
seriously smart person although not as 
smart as Paul Samuelson. Then they got 
other ideas and these spread, and the 
good ideas that are buried in economics 
by and large weren’t emphasized 
enough. I don’t know, 15 years ago or 
so, I rifled through the three leading 
textbooks in introductory economics - 
I’d never taken a course in the subject 
- and I read through them. About the 
20th page of Mankiw’s famous book, 
which succeeded Samuelson’s famous 
book, the guy says smart people make 
their decisions based on opportunity 
costs. Well, that was the last time 
opportunity cost was discussed in 1,000 
pages. I want to tell you that compared

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Charlie Munger at Harvard-Westlake | 3
www.santangelsreview.com
all the disciplines and get synthesis 
and reality across the disciplines. They 
are rewarded in their own little shop 
for being silly and monomaniacal 
and with their high IQs. They do all 
this terrible mischief because they 
don’t know in a functional way what 
they teach in Psychology 101. The 
psychology professors who invented 
and discovered a lot that is very 
important, they are not really helping 
the wider civilization all that much. 
We’re better off having them than not 
having them [but] in terms of what is 
the best that can be in academia, it has 
failed us horribly. With hard science 
and engineering excepted - [and] I 
think the cognition of medicine tends 
to be quite good in the best places and 
biology also tends to be good - but 
boy, you get into the rest of the social 
sciences and you have to be very wary 
because there is an asininity trying to 
clobber you up behind every rock.
With academia failing us, now we turn 
to what happened with our regulators. 
Well, Alan Greenspan at the Federal 
Reserve overdosed on Ayn Rand. 
Basically he kind of thought anything 
that happened in the free market, even if 
it was an axe murder, had to be ok. He’s 
a smart man and [a] good man, but he 
got it wrong. Generally, an over-belief 
in any one ideology is going to do you in 
if you extrapolate it too hard, and that’s 
what happened in economics. What 
happened in economics that caused 
Alan Greenspan’s cognitive failure is 
very simple. They reasoned correctly 
that a free market would be way more 
predictive than anything else, and they 
reasoned correctly that once you had a 
fairly advanced capitalist system – if the 
people that were putting up the capital 
could sell their pieces of ownership in 
the company to other people, they’d 
be more inclined to invest because it 
gave them an option to get out if they 
wanted to leave. It’s not like buying 
[audio unintelligible] at the economics 
department at a really great university 
unless he pretended to believe twaddle. 
Of course, employment is full of this sort 
of thing. Generally, the employment 
relationship - the need for money - 
causes more terrible cognition than any 
other single factor. Upton Sinclair said 
it best of all. He said, ‘It is very hard to 
get a man to believe non-X when his 
way of making a living requires him 
to believe X.’ On a subconscious level, 
your brain plays tricks on you and you 
think [that] what is good for the true 
little me is what you should believe. 
Of course, it’s very hard to deal with 
since it’s not conscious malevolence 
that’s causing the bad cognition -- it’s 
the subconscious reality of the human 
mind.
We have psychology departments with 
distinguished professors, surely they 
can teach our young to avoid – the 
psychology term for this is ‘self-serving 
bias.’ Surely the psychology department 
is teaching our children to avoid 
this. Well, it’s not so. The psychology 
department is full of people who collect 
psychology experiments the way a boy 
collects butterflies. They just like listing 
them and knowing the other people 
who collect the butterflies and so forth. 
Very little synthesis is done from one 
experiment to another, and if you ask 
them to synthesize - where you use 
the findings of psychology against the 
risks of reality, and through synthesis 
create a powerful machine that will 
get the right answer in a complex 
mess - the psychology professors are 
not going to help you. In fact, you’d 
be sort of dropped out of a psychology 
department if you purported to know 
a lot of non-psychology and integrate 
it beautifully with psychology. It goes 
back to what Whitehead said. He 
talked about the fatal unconnectedness 
of academic disciplines. Those bastards 
feel no duty to master the big ideas in 
percent of the profit can’t be earned. 
Well, if you inherited the business or 
your idiot son-in-law is in it, you don’t 
know what else to do. This is what I 
would call an adult problem and most 
people solve it in the adult fashion: 
They learn to tolerate the cheating. But 
that is not the right answer to people 
who want to live a larger and better 
life. But it is a form of Greshem’s Law, 
the new Gresham’s Law. One that is 
not taught in economics courses and 
should be. It is a really serious problem 
and, of course, it relates deeply to what 
happened to create the economic crisis. 
All kinds of people who you would be 
glad to have marry into your family 
compared to what you are otherwise 
going to get did things that were very 
regrettable under these pressures from 
the new Gresham’s Law. 
Well, I’ve done enough for economics, 
let’s go on. Corporate finance is 
beneath contempt. Believing just by 
buying volatile stocks you make an 
extra 7 percentage points per annum, 
I mean those people still believe in 
the tooth fairy and yet it is taught to 
the children. On the other hand, the 
children don’t have to work very hard 
to get there so it’s a Mad Hatter’s tea 
party -- but this is the real world as 
[it] exists. You have these extremely 
dumb things being done by these smart 
people. But a lot of them are under big 
institutional pressure like the poor 
bastard in the law department who 
has to face the new Gresham’s Law. 
Of course, that kind of pressure is on 
all these other people that are doing 
these dumb things, many in academia. 
I had a friend who had a child in the 
economics department at Chicago, 
very free market orthodox economics, 
and [the child] didn’t believe the 
markets were quite as perfect as they 
thought at the University of Chicago 
and he had to hide his views. There 
wasn’t the slightest chance he could do

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Charlie Munger at Harvard-Westlake | 4
www.santangelsreview.com
would hire with some exceptions. They 
knew what they wanted and, boy, did 
it work for them. Of course, if you are 
in investment management, it’s exactly 
the wrong personality type. Maybe you 
want them in the sales department, 
but you don’t want them managing the 
money. It’s the cranky peculiar people 
like those sitting here who will better 
serve you in making these decisions. 
That is another problem with life. [The] 
guy who invented the Peter Principle is 
right: You know we all get promoted in 
hierarchies and, of course, half the time 
some guy gets one category too high 
and of course half the time you have 
someone who is utterly unqualified 
for this spot he is sitting in and yet 
he has the power. He’s got a big ego 
and everything else. What do you do 
about this? This is a serious problem. If 
you don’t think this is a problem with 
Wall Street, look at the personality 
profiles of the people that headed our 
main investment banks. They were 
caricatures. Stan O’Neal or whatever 
his name was at Merrill --                                  
If [Anthony] Trollope invented a 
character like this, you would say, ‘It’s 
too extreme. I can’t get by with this one.’ 
It would be regarded as foolish, not 
as effective satire. That just happened 
again and again and again. And you 
are surprised we have this big mess on 
our hands. Some very powerful forces 
have been unleashed here. Some very 
powerful forces of unreason have been 
allowed to flourish. Of course we get 
a big mess. We always were going to 
have cyclical fluctuations in capitalism. 
We always [were] going to have cyclical 
fluctuations in securities markets. But 
to have them magnified so greatly, and 
to have such exacerbation of the result 
by this extremely liberal use of credit – 
When you talk about liberal use 
of credit, the derivative game was 
just unbelievable. The things people 
cost and actually make a profit. This 
is one of the most seductive gambling 
devices ever invented by man, and some 
nut who took economics thinks that 
the bigger and better it gets, the better 
it is for wider civilization. You now see 
how well that theory has worked. We 
made a wonderful market test of all 
this wonderful academic faith in utterly 
free markets and marketable securities 
-- the more trading the better. And not 
only in marketable securities, but they 
have new securities called derivatives. 
In the old days, knowing that people 
went crazy gambling in securities, 
they had margin rules. You could only 
borrow a limited amount to speculate 
with. [Then] they brought in option 
exchanges, they brought in derivatives, 
they brought in the repo system -- they 
created the most wonderful gambling 
game for anybody with blood really 
coursing in his veins who wants to 
get rich quick. This is one of the most 
attractive things that ever came down 
the pike. Of course, it runs the great 
exodus and creates a big mess in the 
end. How could it not? 
By and large, and it’s interesting to 
think about, it’s mostly a male game. 
The nuts who did most of this damage 
are male. You go into a trading room 
on Wall Street and you won’t find many 
women barking into the phones and 
going to the strip clubs. There is a lot of 
testosterone in our present troubles, and 
of course, the people that get promoted 
logically are sort of like the people that 
win our athletic contests and get to be 
captain of the teams. Many of you were 
in investment management and you 
know how it works. Everybody wants 
the guy that everybody else trusts, who 
can’t stand to lose, that everybody likes, 
and tends to get things done -- and I 
just described the captain of the team 
and so forth. There is a law firm in town, 
Latham and Watkins, that galloped 
past everyone else and that is all they 
a restaurant in the wrong place. Then 
they reasoned that if that was true, if 
you had a really free, liquid, wonderful 
market in securities, that would be 
wonderful, and the bigger and more 
wonderful it was, the better it was for 
the wider civilization. 
When I was at Harvard Law School, 
seldom did a million shares trade in 
a day. Now billions of shares trade 
everyday, and economics professors like 
Alan Greenspan presumably are looking 
forward to trillions. Our civilization is 
not going to work better if we have 
trillions of shares traded everyday. It’s 
the most asinine idea you could ever 
have to extrapolate so vigorously, and 
of course three or four billion shares 
is way too many. We have computer 
programs that are trading with other 
computer programs. We have many 
of the bright people who ought to be 
doing our engineering going to work 
at hedge funds and investment banks 
and algorithmic trading places and so 
on and so on. We’ve got this big share 
of the GDP – and by the way, the way 
GDP is calculated is peculiar. If the 
crime is so bad that I have to hire a 
night watchman, that adds to the GDP. 
Nobody in economics wants to look very 
deeply because it makes their problem 
messier and more complicated as you 
make it more correctly approaching 
reality. 
Well, so at any rate, these people got 
the idea [that] unlimited trading is a 
big plus for civilization. It’s [ironic] 
that the economists and most of these 
people worship Keynes – who thought 
no such thing. [Keynes] said a liquid 
market of securities is one of the most 
attractive gambling devices ever created. 
It has all the joy of gambling, plus it’s 
respectable. Furthermore, instead of 
being a zero-sum game, where you are 
bound to lose the frictional cost, it’s a 
game where you can pay the frictional

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Charlie Munger at Harvard-Westlake | 5
www.santangelsreview.com
[financial] health gets worse and worse 
your profits get higher and higher. I’m 
not kidding! This is accounting the way 
it is ordained in this country as we sit 
here. They are teaching this kind of 
stuff to our children and forcing it on 
our companies. It is absolutely insane. 
Let’s take bad debt reserving for banks. 
That is a really important subject in a 
world where Gresham’s Law is going 
to cause a lot of terrible cognition and 
terrible behavior. The accountants want 
a system and they ordained we have to 
use it that says you compute your bad 
debt reserve actuarially -- you look 
at your bad debt losses in past years, 
and you use that in judging what your 
future bad debt losses will be. But, 
of course, if you are making a totally 
different kind of loan to a different kind 
of borrower, using the past experience 
is insane. It is not just slightly insane, 
it is really insane. Nobody would do 
this with his own money who had 
any sense -- judge his future exposure 
in lending based on his past exposure 
in making a totally different kind 
of loan which is obviously way safer 
than what he is doing now. But once 
the accountants chose this crazy 
accounting convention, then people 
have a wonderful opportunity to game 
the system. If you want your bank to 
look like a big earner for two or three 
years, just make a bunch of lousy loans 
that will take a while to be diagnosed 
as such. Your accountants will cause the 
loans to stay on your books accruing a 
lot of wonderful income and you will 
report it to the analysts, and the credit 
agencies will believe in the income, and 
so on and so on and so on and you’ll 
look fine for quite a while. You can 
say this will eventually come home to 
roost? Oh no, when it starts coming 
home to roost, we’ll just do twice as 
much more and that will swamp the 
old troubles coming home and when 
that gets in trouble we’ll double again 
whole culture was into this craziness. 
People were actually making decisions 
about how much risk to take, based on 
the application of correct math, based 
on an assumption that wasn’t true. And 
by the way, people gradually knew it 
wasn’t true. But by that time they had 
gotten so enculturated in the math and 
they were so good at it they couldn’t 
give it up. It’s like a friend of mine who 
said he couldn’t give up the Catholic 
Church, he’s too invested in it. You 
know he’s 75 years old. We all get that 
way with our best-loved ideas, and it 
happens to people who get ideas about 
risk management. So there was just a 
lot of serious irrationality.   
Now we turn to the accounting 
profession. Now you think accounting 
is something we can trust? Accounting 
is one of the glories of modern 
civilization. In the heyday of Venice, 
they 
really 
made 
double 
entry 
bookkeeping popular. They taught it 
in all the math books of that era just 
the way people draw arithmetic now. 
Anybody who was anybody in Venice 
knew double entry bookkeeping the 
way you know how to scratch your ear. 
This was very helpful to Venice, which 
at one time was the most important 
commercial city in the world. And so 
these accountants with this glorious 
background got into establishing their 
accounting principles. What did they 
finally come to? This is relatively new 
once sort of after the mess unfolded. 
They came up with this loon. They said 
if you are on the edge of extinction, 
your credit is utterly destroyed, you 
have no cash to do anything, to buy 
anything, but your outstanding bonds 
are selling at 50 percent of their face 
value -- you have made a profit equal 
to 50 percent of the face value of the 
bonds. It’s not a profit you can eat or use 
because you don’t have any cash with 
which to buy the bonds, but in terms 
of the financial statement, as your real 
would agree to, thinking they were 
making money. For sure, they had 
these corporate finance types who 
did this work showing from the risk 
management department, the exposure 
of the firm. You want to talk about 
childish, high IQ childish. This is 
right up there. It’s hard to think of 
anything much worse. I suppose the 
eighth husband of Zsa Zsa Gabor or 
something would be competing for 
similar honors of cognition. 
What they did was, they said, ‘Well, 
financial outcomes in securities markets 
must be plottable on a normal curve,’ – 
[a] so-called Gaussian curve, named for 
probably the greatest mathematician 
that ever lived. Gauss must be turning 
over his grave now with what’s 
happening. Of course, the math was 
very helpful because you could come up 
with numbers and results that would 
make people feel confident with what 
they were doing. There was only one 
trouble with the math: The assumption 
was wrong. Financial outcomes in 
securities markets are not plottable. It 
is not a law of God that outcomes in 
securities prices will fall over time on 
a curve and [follow] reality according 
to Gauss’s curve. Quite the contrary, 
the tails are way fatter. Warren and I 
always knew this by doing what might 
be called Monte Carlo simulation 
in our heads, just roughly. We could 
just see it didn’t fit, too many extreme 
things happened that the math didn’t 
correctly predict, and so we just 
thought they were all damn fools. Of 
course, we never bothered to learn the 
math. We used to sit  at Salomon when 
they made these presentations in the 
risk management crowd with all these 
figures, all the daily trading and the 
disaster, blah blah blah and so forth. 
We would just roll eyes at one another 
that grown men could be doing this. 
And yet we were only two when the

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Charlie Munger at Harvard-Westlake | 6
www.santangelsreview.com
firm actually owns, why shouldn’t we 
mark-down the bonds on the other 
side of the balance sheet?’ Well, I said: 
‘Because an insane result is going to 
have bad practical consequences in the 
world.’ And she said: ‘We don’t talk 
that way.’ She may still be there for all 
I know. 
At any rate, we get into these amazing 
results. Then, if you take our legislators 
on the Republican side, they have these 
Alan Greenspan nuts who thought, 
unlike Keynes, that just unlimited 
derivatives and market trading and 
use of credit had to be good because it 
was a fast-acting free market and free 
markets are good. Of course, anybody 
could see that it was going to implode 
sooner or later. It wasn’t like all human 
experience didn’t show that there would 
be hell to pay sooner or later. You didn’t 
know when, but you knew a cataclysm 
was coming at some time. I certainly 
knew. And I would argue that doling 
out credit easily, making a lot of loans 
that are likely to be unpaid does more 
harm than good. I think what we have 
just been through proves that you are 
not helping somebody when you prop 
him up in some house he can’t afford 
and make every month agony for 12 
months and eventually dispossess him 
in front of his friends and tear down 
his ego and disappoint his wife. It is 
a really miserable experience and they 
don’t do this in places like Switzerland. 
You want to own a damn house, keep 
earning or borrow from your folks or 
do something. I mean, they are not into 
providing loose credit for houses. They 
don’t want a crazy boom in housing 
prices and they don’t want -- you know 
they are Germanic. If we had a more 
Germanic culture, we wouldn’t have 
done as many dumb things as we’ve 
done. Not that our Germans aren’t 
acculturated into our culture in due 
course, but the old Germanic virtues of 
Well, you see the drift of this everywhere 
you turn and, of course, you turn to the 
regulators. Imagine the SEC, they had 
trouble diagnosing Bernie Madoff. 
You have to believe in the tooth fairy 
to believe he was having those figures 
by the methods he claimed to be using. 
You wouldn’t have gotten that one 
by Howard Marks for two seconds. I 
mean you wouldn’t have finished your 
sentence before he noticed it couldn’t 
be true. But people get into powerful 
positions in the regulatory authority 
who don’t think like Howard Marks. 
And the end result is these disastrous 
regulatory decisions, and then of course 
people get co-opted. Almost everybody 
at the SEC is young enough, so they 
want to leave and go back to business 
and they are going to go back to the 
regulated business. Well, how great a 
regulator is that going to be?To do a 
lot of unpleasant things? The English 
system for trial lawyers is much better. 
If a trial lawyer is really good, and he is 
really smart and so forth, they put him 
on the bench. That way, they get rid of 
one important competitor so they get 
more briefs, they get a good judge and 
he stays a good judge because he never 
comes back into trial lawyering and he 
never goes into [audio unintelligible] 
stuff in England. That is a much better 
system of getting a trial judge than we 
have elsewhere, but it is rare. What 
we have now, a lot of our judges are 
like the SEC commissioners that go 
out and join the regulated part of the 
world. The conflicts of interest are just 
rife and the failures of cognition from 
their background and their professions 
like accounting. 
I had this discussion with this woman 
who was head of the accounting 
standards authority, very high IQ 
women, very high-grade woman. [But] 
nutty as a fruitcake. She said to me, 
‘Charlie don’t you want it consistent? 
If we are going to mark-up bonds the 
and if you are deposit insured you 
can do it ad infinitum as long as your 
accountants will let you because you are 
using the government’s credit to attract 
the new money. And, of course, that 
credit is unlimited. 
Who in the hell would have this kind 
of accounting that had any sense of all 
in a [audio unintelligible] civilization? 
It’s our leading accountants, the people 
you’d be glad to have marry into your 
family. And not one of them has the 
least tinge of shame. They are like Upton 
Sinclair, they believe what they have 
to believe to make a living. What the 
accountants can’t stand is the idea that 
if you made them do what rationality 
requires, make this thing realistic -- 
make it a reasonable judgment about 
what is going to be really collected in 
the future. What’s really sound here? 
They sense that plaintiffs’ lawyers will 
sue them and they really won’t be able 
to do it. That is unendurable to them. 
They would rather have the figures 
all wrong and the figures create the 
kind of a mess that we’ve had than 
face reality. On a subconscious level, 
they just choose the accounting that 
makes it easy for them to do. It’s like 
a surgeon once said [at] the Jules Stein 
Eye Institute [when] I asked him, 
‘Why are you doing a totally obsolete 
cataracts operation?’ This guy was a 
genius who correctly diagnosed my 
left eye before it went out for good and 
he said, ‘Charlie, it’s such a wonderful 
operation to teach.’ I’m not inventing 
this story. I mean, if you are really 
training a bunch of interns, I mean, this 
was a hell of a wonderful experience 
and you know how he stopped doing 
an obsolete cataracts operation at the 
Jules Stein Eye Institute? When the 
patients all voted with their feet. That 
is one of the glories with capitalism. 
If people are asinine enough, the 
customers will frequently bring reality 
to bear by voting with their feet.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Charlie Munger at Harvard-Westlake | 7
www.santangelsreview.com
was perfectly obvious that something 
like this was bound to happen although 
we didn’t know when. So this is very, 
very significant cognitive failure and 
it has just shot through pretty much 
through the whole civilization. It isn’t 
everybody. If it were, the civilization 
would perish and it would deserve to. 
There are people who have behaved 
well through this and a lot of them I 
can see sitting in this room. But what 
would you suspect with a bunch of 
people that are supporting a really 
great school? I mean, these are not the 
scumbags of the world. And so, all I 
can say is that this is very serious stuff 
and what we have all done together 
at Harvard-Westlake School is to try 
to create the kind of education that 
reduces the future nonsense. It is not 
easy, because very powerful forces of 
self-interest and subconscious powers 
of delusion are working against us 
-- and, of course, we live in a nation 
with different ethnic groups, different 
religious groups and so forth. Our 
civilization is a lot harder [to] manage 
than say, Denmark or Norway or 
something -- and always will be. 
Therefore, we should be doing it better, 
not worse, and of course, it is just the 
opposite. We have a worse problem and 
therefore we are governing it worse. In 
California, we have carefully created 
two types of people in the legislature: 
right-wing nuts and left-wing nuts 
who hate each other. Every 10 years 
they get together and each side has 
two or three decent halfway moderate 
people and they join together in 
throwing them out. They identify those 
six or eight people - ‘We don’t want 
any normal people in our legislature’ - 
and they gerrymander them out. This is 
the largest state in the most important 
country in the world, and that is the 
way our legislature works. How many 
of us are really doing anything about 
it? It is something. 
to learn much and never going to pay 
much. But you know people feel that 
people with no prospects ought to get 
the same type of credit as people with 
prospects. They don’t do this in India, 
they don’t this in China, they don’t do 
this in Japan. I mean, this is an American 
phenomenon and of course, I think it 
does enormous damage to shovel out a 
lot of dumb credit, raising false hopes. 
I think it creates ungodly messes and it 
degrades human responsibility and that 
is a very important subject. 
Another thing that is never discussed 
any more is my idea of one of the 
great philosophers of America who 
was Charlie Frankel. He was mugged 
to death in due course because, 
after all, he lived in Manhattan in a 
different time. Before he was mugged 
to death, he created this philosophy 
of responsibility. He said the system 
is responsible in proportion to the 
degree that the people who make the 
decisions bear the consequences. So 
to Charlie Frankel, you don’t create 
a loan system where all the people 
who make the loans promptly dump 
them on somebody else through lies 
and twaddle, and they don’t bear the 
responsibility when the loans are good 
or bad. To Frankel, that is amoral, that 
is an irresponsible system. That is like 
selling an automobile with bad brakes 
and you know the brakes are bad. 
You shouldn’t do it. Well, we’ve just 
been through a period where nobody 
gave a damn about an irresponsible 
system. If you can engage in business 
in some lawful way and dump trouble 
on somebody else through God knows 
what techniques, the more the merrier. 
It finally got to be like musical chairs, 
except in musical chairs, you are only 
one chair short when the music stops. 
In the new form of musical chairs, 
everybody has a hell of a time and 
is sitting on his ass on the floor. Of 
course, that is what we created and it 
thrift and so on did not get into this 
kind of trouble.  
The head of Freddie Mac who had a 
Ph.D. in economics came out and sat 
with us and said what should we do? I 
was young and optimistic, being 60 or 
whatever I was, or 75. I said: ‘It’s very 
simple. You are using so much credit and 
there is so much danger in what you are 
doing that you should make no more 
than 80 percent loans to people with 
good credit. You shouldn’t do anything 
else. You’ve got a bunch of experts who 
you have hired to lobby everybody and 
to bring you information as to what 
the legislators want and so on and so 
on. You should go back there and fire 
them all and just say, when they ask 
you what you were doing, ‘I’m sorry, 
but we are using so much leverage and 
the government’s credit and we simply 
can’t afford to do anything with this 
much leverage except to make loans 
to sound people on sound properties.’ 
Well that would have been very good 
advice if he had followed it. For one 
thing, he’d probably still be employed. 
But, of course, can you imagine the 
advice this man got from his friendly 
investment bankers, consultants, public 
relations type[s], lobbyists? He bought 
every dumb derivative and went into 
every dumb thing and of course the 
place went totally insolvent in due 
course. 
I think the government was totally 
correct, by the way, given the problems 
of the recent crisis, to just nationalize 
the whole thing. They had to and we’ve 
got the problem, but there is very little 
taste that I see toward really changing 
the whole thing of making lending an 
entitlement process. But boy, teaching 
people they don’t really have to pay 
and a lot of the credit being given 
for education, a lot of it in for-profit 
education. [This] is very foolish credit 
given to people who are never going

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Charlie Munger at Harvard-Westlake | 8
www.santangelsreview.com
The other helpful thing about our 
present condition is that in the past 
we’ve had rascals and fools. After their 
era, we’ve had the wonderful civilization 
that you and I can remember. Or at 
least a lot of us can remember. If you 
go back to the age of the robber barons, 
it’s a very interesting age. Ambrose 
Bierce said of Collis P. Huntington, 
correctly: 
‘He 
was 
scrupulously 
dishonest and had no more soul than 
a shark.’ That was a pretty accurate 
description of Collis P. Huntington, 
but he did create the toughest section 
of a big transcontinental railroad that 
we needed. Then, if you get into the 
investment banking manipulators of a 
former age, you get into Jay Gould and 
Russell Sage. They were unbelievable 
because they controlled railroads -- not 
for the purpose of earning money from 
freight, but for the purpose of pushing 
the railroad down artificially as they 
shorted the securities and then letting 
it go up and dumping the securities. 
They were just shucking suckers by 
manipulating the companies they were 
in charge of running. Somebody in 
Congress accurately described those 
two men. He said, ‘When they are 
talking, they are lying and when they 
are quiet they are stealing.’ We live 
in the aftermath of Russell Sage and 
Jay Gould. They are gone, and we’ve 
since had Thomas Edison and Henry 
Ford. We’ve had a lot of wonderful 
achievement and investment banking 
had a long phase when it behaved 
better than it has in the recent buildup 
to sin and folly, and so we can hopefully 
believe we will go back. We don’t have 
anybody who operates exactly like Jay 
Gould and Russell Sage now that they 
are gone. Maybe what I am decrying 
now will -- maybe it too will pass. 
Thank you. 
[Floor opens to questions from the 
audience]
Well, how smart did you have to be to 
know that that was dangerous? They 
didn’t care as long as they could report 
the income. They didn’t care about the 
moral failure of flim-flamming and 
then when they started losing money, 
they would just flim-flam a little more 
to get more revenues. Is this the way 
a government assisted part of the 
banking system should behave? It was 
not only folly, it was sin. 
By the way, you aren’t supposed to talk 
about sin in economics, but sin has 
consequences. The world is a complex 
place and investment banks of course 
got into their share of sin. Particularly in 
the derivative trading and in the clients 
they took on and the lousy stuff they 
sold and so forth. Everybody regrets 
it, and there have been apologies from 
investment banking which of course 
were deserved. But, in essence, I don’t 
think they feel that bad about it all. They 
think, ‘Well, we are in a tough aggressive 
business, we’ve got to get ahead, we’ve 
got to provide opportunities for the 
young men who come to work here. If 
something is legally saleable, we have 
to sell it. We can’t let the guy on the 
street make more money than we do.’ 
These are the guys that had to win the 
games. Angelides said to one of the 
investment banks, ‘You were like the 
guy who sold a car knowing the brakes 
were defective and then went out and 
bought life insurance on the guy to 
whom you had sold the car.’ 
This is not too attractive of a human 
activity. Well, of course, Angelides was 
right. The answer was, ‘Yeah, well, we’ve 
got people in different departments. 
The department that does the selling 
wants to do everything that is legal and 
the department that controls the risk 
wants to be sure -- they don’t even talk 
to each other. There is no sin here, we 
are just aggressive people each trying to 
do his own thing the best he can.’ 
Well, I have probably gone on long 
enough about some of the problems 
that you can see everywhere, and surely 
they are deep cognitive problems that 
affect the very smartest people in really 
major institutions. They are not easy 
to solve. I should close with are there 
any hopeful signs? Well, think about 
that for a minute. When the Chinese 
government had people starving by 
the millions, disaster, rebellion and so 
forth -- their ideas weren’t working, 
their troubles were way worse than 
ours. That is what caused the change 
in China. The failure prompted the 
reform. Now, fortunately, they had a 
system where if the guy at the top got 
a good idea, he could change things. In 
our system that is not so simple. But at 
any rate, failure sometimes does cause 
significant reform, and lord knows 
we’ve had a lot of failure. As nearly as 
I can tell, we aren’t going to get much 
legislative change.
Now if you take investment banking, 
I would say that is the part of the 
investment profession that has gotten 
the worst hatred. People are not that 
mad at private equity or conventional 
investment management, you know, for 
pension funds or private individuals. 
But you can cut the hatred against 
investment bankers with a knife. 
Somebody like Don Graham says he 
hasn’t seen anything like it in his 40 
years in Washington. I mean, the hatred 
is very extreme and the criticism [that] 
hurts the most is the criticism that is 
true. The truth of the matter is that some 
of this hatred is deserved and some of 
the hatred of the commercial banks is 
deserved. The commercial banks got 
too aggressive at flim-flamming people 
on credit cards and then they started 
loaning to people aggressively because 
they knew the accountants would let 
them report the income when they 
knew the guy had eight cards and was 
kind of kiting from one card to another.

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Charlie Munger at Harvard-Westlake | 9
www.santangelsreview.com
obscene. I would change the laws so 
that all these people would have to do 
something else but that isn’t going to 
happen. I don’t think minor tinkering 
is going to change it all that much. 
And I think minor tinkering is all you 
are going to get. 
I knew we’d have a hell of a mess 
eventually. I just didn’t know when it 
was coming. I think I know eventually 
we will have a hell of an inflation mess, 
but I can’t tell you when it is coming. It 
could be way in the future. But I think 
eventually you’ll have it.
Question #4: [Risk of a long 
tail geopolitical event?]
Munger: 
Something we came as close to as we 
came recently to real crisis is deadly 
serious. You have to remember that 
Germany during the Pax Britannica 
was a pretty respectable place, and in 
that place little Albert Einstein got 
his entire primary education from 
the primary schools of the Catholic 
Church and it was a pretty civilized 
place. With enough of an economic 
mess and enough chaos, a bunch 
of civilized Germans, half of them 
Catholic, ended up supporting Hitler 
and creating a barbarism and an evil 
that frankly makes you shiver in your 
seat as you remember it. So I don’t think 
you should assume that a prosperous 
decent place like the one that educated 
little Albert in the Catholic schools is 
guaranteed to stay forever no matter 
what happens or how big the messes 
get. I think these things are serious and 
I don’t think these things automatically 
fix themselves. I think that the good 
people have to join together the way 
we have all joined together in helping 
Harvard-[Westlake] School. There are 
other things that should be done in the 
world. I don’t think we live in the type 
of world where it is at all responsible 
the chain of command. By the way, 
you said it was greed that has caused 
all this, I think you’ve used the wrong 
word. It’s envy. Envy is the great driver. 
One investment bank can’t stand some 
other investment bank being bigger 
and better. Even though the guy is 
making $5 million a year, he can’t stand 
it. It’s envy. And envy was in the laws 
of Moses, you couldn’t even covet your 
neighbor’s donkey. I mean, those old 
Jews really knew it would cause a lot 
of trouble even among sheep herders. 
So you put it in the whole financial 
system and make it sacred and feed it 
so you have an envy driven miasma -- 
well, of course it’s going to be a hell of 
a mess. The way to avoid envy to some 
extent was described by Aristotle. He 
said, ‘People will adjust better if the 
perceived difference in outcomes in 
society are perceived as just.’ Therefore, 
everybody that wants to help society 
be stable should have a duty to 
arrange 
everything, 
including 
his 
own compensation, [to] be perceived 
elsewhere as just. Well, all I can say is 
that if Aristotle were still alive, he’d be 
a grumpy old man because his message 
hasn’t fully been assimilated yet. 
Question 
#3: 
[Is 
there 
a 
specific reform you would 
urge to be adopted?]
Munger: 
Well, if I were running the world. If I 
were the Lee Kuan Yew of the United 
States, believe me I would know how 
to fix this. But, of course, nobody has 
that power, and if Lee Kuan Yew -- if 
he had been born here, [he] wouldn’t 
have been able to do what he did in 
Singapore. I think the whole idea that 
we need massive legalized gambling in 
every hamlet of the world and that our 
system of capital allocation ought to 
have the most attractive and powerful 
legalized gambling of all sucking 
in more money -- the whole idea is 
Question #1: [Why didn’t the 
government listen to the 
warnings about derivatives 
from 
Brooksley 
Born 
and why isn’t there much 
reform?]
Munger: 
Brooksley Born has company. When 
they brought in the options exchanges 
there was one letter saying it was a 
dumb idea -- and it was from Warren 
Buffett. They didn’t pay any attention 
to him, either. There was a lot of us 
they didn’t pay any attention to. These 
are powerful forces and in human 
affairs you can’t expect perfection. In 
a miasma of prosperity and gambling 
with $100,000 bills floating around 
like confetti, you can’t expect people to 
behave as if they were in a monastery. 
That is not the way the world works 
and you can’t expect human cognition 
to be all that good. So you are just 
decrying a fact of life. Of course, I have 
been decrying it in the same way. But 
you diagnosed it correctly.
I think [you are] right when [you]
suspect not much that [you] want to 
happen is going to happen. Maybe we 
have two more of these messes ahead of 
us before things change. Not a pleasant 
thought.
Question #2: [Is there a better 
way to motivate people who 
are below the executive level 
to do a better job getting 
quality business as opposed 
to high volume?]
Munger: 
The younger people are going to adopt 
to whatever the ethos is that suffuses 
the place. If you’ve got a Stanley 
O’Neal at the top that has to win, the 
ethos is going to be terrible. It’s just 
that simple. The whole ethos of the 
place has to change for the behavior 
of the place [to] change down through

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Charlie Munger at Harvard-Westlake | 10
www.santangelsreview.com
will be terrible messes as there have 
been in all of the reported past history 
of civilization. I don’t think we get 
to a wonderful stage where all these 
cataclysms are past forever. I think we 
were very lucky that our cataclysms 
weren’t a lot worse. Hitler could have 
supported the Jews in atomic energy 
instead of kicking them out. I mean, 
we could have had all kinds of different 
results that could have made our 
problems way worse. No, I would say 
it’s probably in the nature of human 
civilization that there will be terrible 
cataclysms and I don’t think you are 
going to have 500 years of perfect calm. 
Won’t matter to me. [END]
[This transcript has been edited lightly 
for clarity]   
obeying authority. They are ideally 
suited by nature for just what they’ve 
had to endure and I don’t think we are 
at all well suited for the kind of a mess 
they had. I don’t think we should test 
our situation with more stupidity that 
causes results like that. 
Who is talking about changing 
accounting? 
Who 
has 
blamed 
accountants for any of this? That is real 
cognitive failure. These guys have really 
failed the rest of us and they are proud 
of it. It’s like Nietzsche’s character who 
had a lame leg and said he was proud of 
it. They are proud of their dysfunction. 
It is quite serious when you have 
troubles and the people who do things 
are proud of their ignorance. We are 
talking about that exact kind of a thing. 
You want a world that elevates the right 
kind of people. You want a world where 
the Lee Kuan Yews get more power 
and the damn fools get less. I don’t 
know how you get there but I have to 
bequeath that to a new generation. I 
tried to do the best that I can in my 
own time. I am not required to go on 
prattling like this when it makes some 
people hate me. I could be sitting on 
the country club porch. It isn’t just the 
fun of doing this that brings me here, 
it’s a feeling of duty.
Question #5: How cataclysmic 
do you view the longer term 
future?
Munger: 
Well, in the longer term future, there 
not to participate in trying to fix some 
of these things as best we can. We 
have serious troubles and I know of 
the investment professionals I see in 
the room -- I probably know Howard 
Marks as well as I know anybody 
and he is a very smart man and I’d be 
interested in knowing -- Howard, have 
I overstated it or is it close to right?
Howard Marks: 
No, I think Charlie it is close to right. I 
think that the problems we’ve had have 
stemmed from human failings and 
they are never going to change. You 
can adjust here and there, and you can 
encourage and dissuade with regulation 
-- but the ability, for example, for greed 
to overcome morals and prudence, will 
never change.
Munger: 
Well, I lived in a world for a long 
time where the behavior was better in 
finance and investment management -- 
and in investment banking, particularly. 
That world could come back. I don’t 
think the present craziness is destined 
to be our lot. I think if this thing hadn’t 
been checked, if it had just gone on 
and on and the mess had been greater 
-- in Japan, when they had their mess, 
the asset values were about three times 
higher than they were here in relation 
to GDP so their fall back, in terms of 
psychological feelings of net worth – 
and Japan got twenty years of stasis. 
But that’s a homogenous nation of 
people who believe in courtesy and 
Disclaimer  
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED HEREIN IS A TEXTUAL REPRESENTATION OF A PRESENTATION 
GIVEN BY MR. CHARLES MUNGER AT HARVARD-WESTLAKE SCHOOL. WHILE EFFORTS ARE MADE 
TO PROVIDE AN ACCURATE TRANSCRIPTION, THERE MAY BE MATERIAL ERRORS, OMISSIONS, OR 
INACCURACIES IN THE REPORTING OF THE SUBSTANCE OF THE VIDEO PRESENTATIONS. IN NO 
WAY DOES SANTANGEL’S REVIEW, LLC ASSUME ANY RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY INVESTMENT OR 
OTHER DECISIONS MADE BASED UPON THE INFORMATION PROVIDED ON THIS WEBSITE OR IN 
ANY TRANSCRIPT. USERS ARE ADVISED TO REVIEW THE APPLICABLE VIDEO PRESENTATION ITSELF 
BEFORE MAKING ANY INVESTMENT OR OTHER DECISIONS.